blog for mcp-jupyter server (#3059)
block/goose: documentation/blog/2025-06-24-mcp-jupyter-server/index.md

---
title: "MCP Jupyter: AI-Powered Machine Learning and Data Science"
description: Enable AI agents to work directly with your Jupyter notebooks, leveraging persistent memory and stateful collaboration for enhanced ML and data science workflows

> date: 2025-06-24

Author: Yeah, thanks

authors:
  - damien
  - dean
  - harrison
---

![MCP Jupyter Server](data-goose.png)

Machine learning and data science workflows are inherently iterative. You load data, explore patterns, build models, and refine your approach based on results. But traditional AI assistants lose context between interactions, forcing you to reload data and re-establish context repeatedly—making data-heavy development slow and expensive.

The [**MCP Jupyter Server**](https://github.com/block/mcp-jupyter) solves this by enabling AI agents like Goose to work directly with your Jupyter notebooks, maintaining persistent memory and state across interactions while letting the AI interact with your data through code execution rather than raw data transfer.

<!--truncate-->

## The Memory and Context Problem

> Traditional AI coding assistants face a fundamental limitation: they lose context between code iterations. They also are not designed for adhoc work where the expectation is the code should run from start to finish. This creates several challenges for data-heavy ML workflows:

Reviewer: I would find it very helpful to have this problem explained with an example. The same example could then be used to show how much better the AI agent works when the MCP Jupyter Server is enabled. Happy to collaborate, maybe making a little video about this!

> Traditional AI coding assistants face a fundamental limitation: they lose context between code iterations. They also are not designed for adhoc work where the expectation is the code should run from start to finish. This creates several challenges for data-heavy ML workflows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Traditional AI coding assistants face a fundamental limitation: they lose context between code iterations. They also are not designed for interactive work like data and model exploration, instead favoring end-to-end solutions to a prompted problem. This creates several challenges for data-heavy ML workflows:
```

- **Constant data reloading**: Each interaction requires re-loading or describing your dataset
- **Expensive iterations**: Large datasets are slow and costly to process repeatedly

> - **Context size**: The raw data is also too large to be fit in context

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Context size**: The raw data may be too large to be fit in context
```

> - **Not designed for adhoc work**: It is harder to have the model do some steps for you, and then let you take over and then later pass control back to the model

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Not designed for interactive work**: It is harder to have the assistant do some steps and then transfer control back to the human or vice versa
```

This has made it difficult to use AI to help with data science workflows, which led to the creation of the MCP Jupyter Server.

## A Better Approach: Persistent State

> The MCP Jupyter Server takes a different approach. Instead of losing context between interactions, it maintains persistent memory and lets the AI interact with your data through code execution. This creates a powerful paradigm:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The MCP Jupyter Server takes a different approach. Instead of losing context between interactions, it maintains persistent memory and lets the AI interact with your data through Jupyter code cell execution. This creates a powerful paradigm:
```

- **Persistent memory**: Variables and state are maintained across all interactions
- **Efficient iterations**: No need to reload data or re-establish context

> - **Code-based data interaction**: AI explores data through execution, not given the raw data

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Code-based data interaction**: AI explores data through execution, not given the raw data in context
```

> - **True pair programming**: Seamless collaboration within the same notebook context

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **True pair programming**: Seamless collaboration between assistant and human within the same notebook context
```

## Transforming ML Workflows

### Exploratory Data Analysis

> Instead of describing your dataset, let the AI explore it directly:

Reviewer 2: Trying to cut down on `the AI` here and elsewhere

```suggestion
Instead of describing your dataset, explore it directly with AI:
```

> <span style={{color: '#2563eb', fontWeight: 'bold'}}>User:</span> "Help me understand this customer dataset"
> 
> <span style={{color: '#059669', fontWeight: 'bold'}}>AI:</span> "Let me explore your data structure first"
> 
> *<span style={{color: '#6b7280', fontStyle: 'italic'}}>[AI executes: df.info(), df.describe(), df.head()]</span>*
> 
> <span style={{color: '#059669', fontWeight: 'bold'}}>AI:</span> "I can see you have 50,000 customers with 12 features. The data includes demographics (age, income), behavioral metrics (purchase_frequency, avg_order_value), and some missing values in the 'phone_number' column. Would you like me to create visualizations for the key relationships, like age vs income or purchase patterns?"
> 
> <span style={{color: '#2563eb', fontWeight: 'bold'}}>User:</span> "Yes, show me the age and income distributions, and any correlations"
> 
> <span style={{color: '#059669', fontWeight: 'bold'}}>AI:</span> "Perfect! I'll create histograms for age and income, plus a correlation heatmap"
> 
> *<span style={{color: '#6b7280', fontStyle: 'italic'}}>[AI generates and displays visualizations]</span>*

> The AI can see your actual column names, data types, and distributions—leading to much more relevant suggestions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The assistant can see your actual column names, data types, and distributions—leading to much more relevant suggestions.
```

### Interactive Model Development

> The AI becomes a true collaborator in your modeling process:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
AI becomes a true collaborator in your modeling process:
```

The demo walks through a typical data science workflow:
- **Install Missing Libraries**: Installing missing libraries for the notebook
- **Data Generation**: Creating synthetic data for analysis
- **Model Training**: Fitting a linear regression model with scikit-learn
- **Results Analysis**: Extracting model coefficients and performance metrics
- **Visualization**: Creating plots with seaborn

## Getting Started

The MCP Jupyter Server integrates seamlessly with existing workflows and can also be used with the notebook viewer in VS Code based IDEs.

For detailed setup and configuration, check out the [complete documentation](https://block.github.io/mcp-jupyter/).

<head>
  <meta property="og:title" content="MCP Jupyter Server: Bringing Notebook Intelligence to AI Agents" />
  <meta property="og:type" content="article" />
  <meta property="og:url" content="https://block.github.io/goose/blog/2025/06/24/mcp-jupyter-server" />
  <meta property="og:description" content="A powerful MCP server that enables AI agents to interact with Jupyter notebooks while preserving kernel state and variable context" />

>   <meta property="og:image" content="https://block.github.io/goose/assets/images/mcp-jupyter-server.png" />

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  <meta property="og:image" content="https://block.github.io/goose/assets/images/data-goose-31db12eb84fe22345f4ed83d50d8d41f.png" />
```

  <meta name="twitter:card" content="summary_large_image" />
  <meta property="twitter:domain" content="block.github.io/goose" />
  <meta name="twitter:title" content="MCP Jupyter Server: Bringing Notebook Intelligence to AI Agents" />
  <meta name="twitter:description" content="A powerful MCP server that enables AI agents to interact with Jupyter notebooks while preserving kernel state and variable context" />

>   <meta name="twitter:image" content="https://block.github.io/goose/assets/images/mcp-jupyter-server.png" />

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  <meta name="twitter:image" content="https://block.github.io/goose/assets/images/data-goose-31db12eb84fe22345f4ed83d50d8d41f.png" />
```
